Hi everybody. My name is Barret Schloerke.
I like the wave. Thank you.
There's a QR link to the slides that will also be at the very last slide if you miss it now.
No problem.
So...
Eww.
Alright.
So today I want to start off with a code demo.
It's going to be a small chat app.
Nothing new. Nothing exciting.
But we'll see what happens.
So let's look at this app.
It is a small chat app that has a single tool call available to it that can ask for the weather.
So...
Can I have a city to ask for the current weather?
Chicago.
I'm going to go with that one.
So what is the weather in Chicago?
And then it's going to think about it.
Ask the tool.
It's going to run it.
And it's going to say,
And then it's going to think about it.
Ask the tool.
It's going to respond.
And then it's going to summarize that tool response.
And for the purposes of the demo,
it's going to shut down the session.
That will come in later.
But nothing surprising.
I mean, if we want, we can kind of sneak what the tool output was.
But we can see that it asked the available tool call to ask about Chicago.
And then wrote up a summary of that information.
Nothing too fancy.
But let's actually look what happens underneath the hood.
So we'll rerun that.
And we'll say,
What is the weather in Chicago?
Tool call.
Responding.
And then we're done.
After a few seconds.
Awesome.
Let's check out the chart on the left.
So we have
a simple session start.
And then we have some reactive updating.
And this is like the whole crux of the talk today.
In that this little reactive update
is going to spawn Claude
to do some communication.
That is going to make a post request.
And then it's going to stream back some results
if they're there.
This then prompted to have us
go into executing a tool call.
Which I just happened to do through Mirai.
To go through a background R process.
That itself said,
Hey, I'm going to go get the weather forecast.
And it happened to do
a hit or two requests.
And then finally,
I came back with Claude
and
with the post to say here's the response.
And then we're streaming back
results as Claude does within the website.
This is awesome.
I now have an 8 second demo
and I can point fingers
as to who took the most time.
In this case,
while it is about 7 seconds here,
3 seconds was first Claude.
Then the tool
was here
and it took about 650 milliseconds.
Half a second roughly.
And then finally Claude's response
took another roughly 3 seconds.
So my tool call
is of the big picture,
not the big time sync.
But there are little locations
where we can improve what's happening.
This is all being done through OpenTelemetry.
And OpenTelemetry,
according to their website,
is highly high quality,
ubiquitous and portable telemetry
to enable effective observability.
If we're just looking at our app
the way we were the first time,
we can see what's happening on the surface
but really what's happening underneath
where the computations are being done,
that's the important part to the developers
and during production.
OpenTelemetry provides a set
of APIs and libraries and agents
and instrumentation
to provide observability
for your applications.
In this case,
OpenTelemetry is being integrated
into the R ecosystem
and is currently under development.
So let's look at this a little bit more generically.
OpenTelemetry is really good
at a burst of an action
such as a user clicked
the website or Shiny's
reactivity just started.
After this action
you'll have different services
be engaged,
in this case the green, then the blue,
then the yellow, which then calls a database
and then they undo
their work since they're done processing.
So we can see how long the blue,
then how long
the yellow take,
and then finally accessing that database
how long of your computation time
is performing that.
So, seems like a good idea
to have for production.
How can we do it? What does it take to integrate?
There's two steps.
First one is we need to install OTEL
and OTEL SDK.
Packages will do the OTEL for you.
You as an app author
will need OTEL SDK
and I'd like to take a small
pause here to thank Gabor
because this went from concept
to implementation and on CRAN
in a really fast time and there's lots
of iterations so I just have
to give a big shout out to Gabor.
The second thing you need to do is to
add three, roughly three
environment variables. It depends on your endpoint.
In the demo
I happen to be using LogFire.
It's a third party website
that can host the OpenTelemetry data
and the environment variables
what they are doing
is they're saying please send the information
according to HTTP protocol
and then the location
that you're going to is my LogFire website
and then I'm adding in some authorization.
There's a nice, nice
article that I tested out
different locations just to give you
different interfaces for the demo today
but it's there in the OTEL SDK
Collecting Telemetry Data
article.
So you're probably seeing these
flame graph looking things and you're like
well, what about
Profvis? What about ReactLog?
This is how I debug my applications already.
And Profvis
it allows for local
R code profiling
and it also displays some
memory usage as well.
In ReactLog you can
replay all of the local
reactivity that you have captured
and it always displays a full dependency
graph for every reactive component
within your application.
So if you have a very large application
you'll have a very large connected graph.
I highly recommend it if things aren't working
the way you expect it.
The bad part about both of these packages
is that they only support the main R process.
So if you're using
Mirai which does computing
on a different R process
we don't have access
to that with Profvis or ReactLog.
But with OpenTelemetry
we can pass through some extra headers
and Mirai can do the proper
reporting.
Also Profvis
and ReactLog
are not for production.
By definition both of those packages
produce a memory leak.
They're constantly recording.
Even if we were to write out to disk
you're going to run out of space eventually.
So both of these packages
are great for local development,
great for debugging, but I do not
recommend them for production.
So let's look at these flame graphs.
In this case
we have a long grey one,
a green, blue and gold
and how can we improve
those performances?
There's two approaches that we can do.
The first one we want to reduce the length
of the long running spans.
In this picture and in the demos
there wasn't something that was like
oh I ran for 10 seconds
when I really want it to be one second long.
That would be a situation that you want
to reduce it, but now you can point fingers
as to who is the culprit.
And then the other one is
to limit excessive span nesting.
In this demo it's like
five nesting layers.
Not an issue.
I'd say 10, not an issue.
When you're expecting 10
and it's 100, probably an issue.
But it's excessive span nesting.
Similar to Profiz,
the graph has to go up and down
naturally, but if all of a sudden
you see everyone's like
mid mountains and then you have a
giant spike out of nowhere,
something to investigate. Maybe we can reduce
the overhead.
So let's look at a screenshot
of a similar demo.
In this case
the tool
call happened to take
1.5 seconds to run.
If I can put my mouse there. Sweet.
It happened to do
two HTTP requests
while inside that tool call
to get the weather.
I believe it's you use the city
to get the Latin long and then
given the Latin long it comes back with
the weather location.
But of the
1.5 seconds, only a half
a second was used for the second
request. The first request
was maybe
100 milliseconds.
So of the 1.5 seconds total
that's not really the culprit that I should
be focusing on. Instead
I really think we should focus on
the second of preprocessing
that happens before that post request
or the get request.
That would be something that we could look at to try
to reduce because that's
the tool call is all of my code. It's not
Claude. It's not the responding time.
It's our code.
In addition, if you're
looking at this as well, we can see
Claude's sonnet was streaming
and that took 2.5 seconds.
You could argue if you want
less load on your server
because you're essentially playing proxy
to these models,
have a model that responds faster,
has less chunks that it responds with.
I mean, what is it with
a Facebook model
that just kind of goes blah, answer.
I mean, it's great.
Maybe it's not as good as what you want and so you'll
have to play with that sliding scale
to determine if
you're okay to have the streaming
and it takes a longer response or
you have almost an instantaneous but maybe
not as accurate response.
When looking at a lot of GitHub issues,
I'm constantly
referring back to Joe Cheng's keynote
in 2019 of Shiny
in production.
This is where he went through and described
how you should iterate
and try to make your apps in better
performance but
I would like to have this be updated now to
be leveraging open telemetry
so let's walk through that.
This is the 2025 version.
First, enable open telemetry
to see your span durations.
Second,
let's look at those long spans
that are run in R
and use profits to see where that code
is slow.
For when the code is
slow, let's try to optimize it.
We can, one, move work
outside of Shiny. This is pretty often.
In the
standard case, if you
have consistent computing being done,
maybe lift it outside into
your global.R or
try to do some preprocessing and have
that be loaded before your server function.
Just relocating it
sometimes makes a big, big
difference.
Two, make your code faster.
If you can't move it outside the function,
instead maybe use
DuckDB as a backend. Even if it's
still being processed in memory, it'll
possibly be faster than
what you have already
with dplyr.
Use caching.
If it applies, if you're returning
the same answer for the same input,
maybe we can add a layer of caching on top of
that and then your spans will just
disappear.
And then finally,
use some non-blocking reactivity.
In the demo, I happened
to have the tool call use Mirai
to pull it off the main
R process so that others could do work.
I wasn't showing it in the use case,
but it did pull it off
the main R process, and then that way it wasn't
blocking others to stream
or to do any calculations.
And then repeat.
When you do make some
of these changes, you may have to go back
up to number two and see
profvis and reevaluate your
app, because sometimes just by enabling
caching, spans
will just disappear and your
computation will be very
different in shape compared
to the first time.
And some next steps.
This is all in active development.
I was very
excited to be able to do a live demo there
because I was kind of on like five dev branches
at once.
A little terrifying, but it worked
great.
It's in active development. When we get
back from conf, we'll be trying to
tighten all those up
and finish them. Some things I want
to add in is to have
cleaner error detection in reporting.
OpenTelemetry does a nice job
to say, here's an error, here's the error message,
possibly even
file locations of
where that occurred within the app.
We're trying to toe the line of
are we giving away company secrets to
your own OpenTelemetry?
But it's not the user, it's to you,
so we'll see.
This would also involve setting the
status of the span, saying, oh, we had an
error, I knew this was bad,
let's set it to an error,
versus saying it's unset or okay.
I'd
like to have native PositConnect
integration.
There's been a lot of work about
having information on which
user is visiting your application,
so I kind of want to sneak some of that header
information into the session start to
say, oh, Barrett started this Shiny
session, even though the app is owned by
Daniel.
And then finally, Shiny for Python.
Similar to most things
in the Python world, we won't have
to reinvent the wheel ourselves.
There's already wonderful tools
out there, but doing a lot of
learning here on the R side first.
Thank you so much.
All right, we have a few
questions. Does
it, I'm assuming meaning OpenTelemetry,
come with any performance penalties
to the application?
It's pretty
similar. A lot of the things
that I've been testing,
the functions that we've been integrating
are in the microsecond world,
like tens of microseconds,
so most likely
the
app author logic is going to be
slower than that, so
I think we're okay.
How is OpenTelemetry
different from writing my own logs?
Is it just another logging framework?
It is just
a logging framework, absolutely it is.
It should be treated just like that.
You should have log,
debug, trace, fatal, error,
all the different things, just like a
logging framework. I think the interesting
part here is that
Otel is defined to have a
collector, and so you can have
multiple Shiny applications. They can all be
pointing to the same collector.
The collector will get a batch and then
send upstream to the third-party
website, and that
process is much better than
logs. Logs are wonderful if you
want to send, you own the
server, you only have one server,
and you're writing to a single location,
sure, just use logs, but
when you start having multiple
machines that may or may not exist in five
minutes, like having OpenTelemetry
collect to a third-party
site, it makes it
that much easier.
Alright, cool. Last
question, does it also expose
cat print message?
Cat print message?
What is this?
In, sorry,
the cat function in R, the print
function, does it?
Oh, no, sorry,
does it override the cat function,
the message function, print function,
str, any of those? It does
not. Because you have
to opt in to the different logging levels
if you're doing that, versus spans,
it is
something that you must opt in to as
a developer.
So you'll have to change your item
instead to say
otel log info, or
otel log error, instead of
saying message or cat.
Alright, and
I think your last slide, you were
talking about it's not there for Shiny for Python
yet, but is there
a rough ETA when that might
be up?
No.
Alright,
yep, and then that's it.
That's all our questions, thank you.
Applause